I'm Shane Embury, bass player for Napalm Death.
Been in the band for 27 years.
I guess we're attributed with being one of the first bands to form the genre Grindcore
and I'm here at John Peel's house to look through his millions of records
and put a box together
of records that influenced me
from my earlier years and
show what different forms of music influenced Napalm.
Amazing feeling to be here
and look through the records.
I could be here for a very long time.
Going back to probably an age of about 6 or 7,
I was born in a small village,
I'd get 7 inches bought for me by my mum
from a local record shop that was also a bicycle shop.
I was really into a band called Slade from Birmingham.
It took me about 10 years to find it but I got it.
Great album, great cover, great haircuts, everything. Brilliant!
It was just heavy drums, it's everything I was into.
I was a budding drummer from a young age.
I used to get my grandma's buckets out on a weekly basis
and bash the hell out of them every week and put holes in them.
Slade were wild and nutty so right up my street really,
I loved that stuff.
Slade were very popular at that point,
so were the Sweet, and Top of the Pops was always on.
And of course the theme tune to Top of the Pops
was originally the Zeppelin track
so I think all those elements inspired my love of distorted guitar.
Back then, compared to nowadays,
it wasn't that distorted but it was still over the top for me.
I just loved the sound of it.
I'm pretty thankful my mum bought me this
and not a Rupert the Bear 7 inch really,
it would have been strange to see where it went after that.
And alongside Slade really, the band called Sweet,
which is the first 7" I got by them
it's a Blockbuster 7 inch.
I preferred the B-side, as I mentioned,
much heavier, and the riffing is very influencial,
definitely paved the way as bands went on.
So we'll see if the B-side is actually better than the A-side,
many years later.
So there you go, straight away!
I mean listen to that.
That's just like...
There you go.
It's still totally amazing after all these years.
Listen to that, what's that year?
'73 or something? '74?
That picking style, just evolved over the years....
Judas Priest...and just kept getting faster and faster
until you get to Metallica, and the thrash picking.
I'm sure it all just came from the early '70s and just got faster and faster.
You put that on and say 'Bloody hell, how heavy is that?'
Chuffed to bits with that kind of guitar sound.
Even then. Actually I've heard some bands with far worse guitar sounds than that!
I wanted to be in a band as soon I heard these bands,
bashing my drums and stuff. It was great.
And that's kind of like, the first two bands for me which took me onto Judas Priest.
This is a great record.
I think this was called 'Hell Bent For Leather' in the States,
paranoid Americans probably worried about the title 'Killing Machine'.
When I was growing up in a small village
there wasn't much to do so I was quite an escapist,
definitely outcast in the village.
The rest of the people from school
thought I was a bit strange for listening to heavy metal.
This was the second one I had from the Brittania Music Club,
£1.49 I believe. Brilliant. Heavy stuff.
Rob Halford still had some hair there.
Not sure about Glenn Tipman's pose on that one...
It's funny because all the bands that looked odd
or quite abrasive and strange and my mum would always go
"Look at the state of that" and whatever,
and then there was Exploited and she was like
"Look at the state of him"
and I was like "What's wrong with it? Looks killer!"
So this was on Top of the Pops,
the first track I heard by them,
and I was totally gobsmacked, was just sitting there,
fast, loud, heavy distorted guitar, obnoixous, brilliant.
Loved it!
I thought "I'm into this"
I think it's one of the first points I could feel myself crossing
thinking "There must be more bands like this, I've got to find them out"
This is one of the bands that started to get me into hardcore punk,
them and Discharge
It's a strange thing really, when you think at school,
I rushed in the next day like
"Did you see that band The Exploited on Top of the Pops last night - it was fucking brilliant!"
and everybody was like "Gah! Bollocks! Duran Duran!"
I'm like "Fuck that rubbish! Exploited,
this is what I'm into, this is the way forward, you know".
And here's the first 7 inch along with Nazi Punks Fuck Off,
and the voice struck me as being really interesting
because a lot of punk bands were very aggressive vocally,
while the Dead Kennedys were very high pitched.
I love the sound of it, the B-side, as I mentioned as
I was always into the B-sides as well,
moreso than the A-sides, they always seemed more interesting.
This seems really...at the time...just haunting.
And those kind of progressions, guitar-wise,
those are the kind of progressions I would like, they sound irregular.
And monotonous as well.
There's almost got a kind of Black Sabbath bassline.
It's not quite as sinister as I remember...
And that brings us, more importantly, to Crass.
Crass 7 inch, which is one of many that are out there that I picked,
but these are very important for 1981-85 period Napalm Death.
Nicholas Bowen who was the main guy that formed Napalm Death in 1981,
Crass was one of the main bands that he was into.
Crass were instrumental in their thought process, musically,
and also ideology-wise, and also with Napalm Death to this day
the ideology - the themes Crass talk about are still prevalent today
for sure, their influence still resonates within the band.
As if by magic...
Discharge. Gobsmacked.
They must have captured the moment in a way - really powerful.
For me - one of the top ten punk records,
everything about it is so intense.
The best way to describe it is an ultra punishing sound,
this is where metal and punk were crossing over.
These guys created a whole drum beat that was unique.
It's like [demonstrates] - that's the snares.
That beat has been used by millions and millions of punk bands
that's the D beat - the Discharge beat - and these guys created it.
My friends were kind of satisfied with AC/DC or Judas Priest,
and they were like "that's enough".
When I heard bands like Venom or these or Discharge
I got a kick out of it, like a childish kick -
"I can't believe they've done this".
The Shades was a record store in London at the time many years ago,
and you would see their adverts in the metal mags
that would say 'this is the fastest thing yet'.
You had no idea if it was any good,
but I just had to see those words and I was like
'I'm ordering that album'.
Sometimes it wasn't the fastest and it wasn't that good
- or the first track was fast and the rest weren't so I was disappointed.
But it was just something that I was into
and a couple of my friends were the same.
But Metallica was definitely one of those bands that came out
their original demo was very popular in the tape trading scene
which I was going to later become involved in.
It was because of the tape trading scene - the underground as they called it -
loving it so much that got them their record deal.
Groundbreaking album really.
Micky from Napalm - some of the guys that I met when I went to see gigs at the Mermaid -
it was one of the bands that had crossed over to their side.
As I was crossing over to the punk scene, or had been,
they were getting into the metal bands,
into Metallica and Slayer, Celtic Frost and Venom.
Because to them it sounds more punk
and they were going over like this
and the punk bands were sounding like the harder edge of thrash metal
and vice versa.
And at the same time Micky the drummer from Napalm introduced me to these guys
Swans.
They're the other end of the spectrum because they're really slow.
Painfully slow - that was their thing.
They weren't really everybody's cup of tea but I loved them.
I really loved the sound that they made, the monotony.
They became really important in Napalm's evolution.
Grindcore to us, as much as were into fast hard grinding music,
Swans were just as grinding to us but at the other end of the spectrum.
These guys played the Mermaid in Birmingham in '85...'86...'87, can't remember
which was the place Napalm Death played,
Heresy, Sacrilege, Antisect, Extreme Noise Terror...all the old punk bands...
and they played so loud they pretty much ripped the plaster off the wall.
No word of a lie.
It was an old building anyway, but the whole building resonated,
plaster falling off the walls.
The Mermaid was an amazing place in '85...'86...'87...'88...
loads of great gigs.
For a few years, just pivotal to the punk hardcore scene.
So many bands played there - Extreme Noise Terror,
Heresy, Electro Hippies, Amoebics, Sacrilege, Antisect,
a couple of bands from America came over - DRI, Government Issue,
stuff like that.
It was just brilliant, the first gig I went to
I was invited to see was Napalm, Heresy,
Amoebics...it was £1.50 to get in,
loads of punks sprawled all over the floor, pints of scrumpy for 50p.
It was a really friendly atmosphere, people were great.
We walked in, we were a little bit nervous at the time, we were quite young,
my friend Mitch recognised Justin,
the guitarist at the time because Justin had invited him over,
so we talked to Justin and then Micky Harris saw my denim jacket
with all the crazy band names written on it that he'd never heard of
he was intrigued by that
and probably the way I looked at the time knowing Micky
and came stumbling over and we became friends instantly,
straight away and I watched Napalm live and I was like
"Jesus, this is amazing".
I followed the Napalm Death guys around
and stayed at Micky's house for a long weekend
and the Mermaid was our thing really.
This is an important band to me
Slab - influenced by Swans.
This is an amazing record.
Prior to this record they had various versions that were almost...
disco funk or something really.
I guess they re-recorded some of their earlier songs
but they did it in such an intense way... they were using samples.
In Tunnel of Love, the first song,
I'm pretty sure they must have sampled a concrete mixer,
it was this insane noise that came in with this heavy drum beat.
I was like "listen to the sound of that".
So intense, just that record really.
The track Fleur, the bass sound,
that's probably still one of the grindiest bass tones you'll hear
That was the blueprint for my bass tone.
Here you go really...Grindcore.
Napalm Death are credited with being the originators,
but really two bands that are massively important,
Repulsion - you wouldn't have Grindcore without these guys.
And in conjunction at the same time - Terrorizer.
Two bands across the seas - I became good friends with both -
Jesse joined Napalm on guitar later on.
Very important bands really.
You can definitely tell Repulsion influenced Terrorizer,
and likewise both bands influenced Napalm later on.
And likewise we influenced them.
Definitely two of the most important records in the foundation of Grindcore.
I will go out on a limb and say I used to put this on in the bedroom
when you're a young lad, and practice the old headbanging to this.
I was not ashamed to say this it was amazing.
This was it for me until I saw Napalm Death.
I used to tape trade with these two - Oscar and Jessie
and I wasn't familiar with the LA timezone so I'd ring these guys at 2 in the morning.
They were both Mexican and their mum didn't like me very much
so I'd get this loud Spanish telling off for waking them up.
What we have here, finally is The Peel Session - test pressing.
Which is always nice.
Lots of stars here - next to the tracks -
I believe was John's rating of whether it was good or not.
I presume a lot of stars mean it's good.
Goes up to three - but I see here that there's a four.
So that must...oh there's a few fours...
So he really liked this.
And here's the actual thing itself...
It was a great experience really.
They were used to the bands recording four songs
but we recorded 16 in 5 3/4 minutes.
So that kinda put them in a bit of a flummox I guess.
I was a big thumbs up really, we were really chuffed and happy.
And now I'm sitting here.
So all those teachers that told me I was going to get nowhere
can fuck off really.
[laughs]